[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: There's been
one consistent message about how
to contend with these
chaotic and, for some,
even frightening times,
to return to nature.
We have a very special
guest with us today
whose lineage is to live in
harmony with Mother Earth, which
we all need to
start considering.
Chase Iron Eyes is a
member of the Sioux tribe.
He's here to tell
us all about how
nature will heal our
ailing people and cultures
and so much more.
Chase, it's wonderful to
be here with you today.
>> CHASE IRON EYES: Man,
thank you for having me.
>> REGINA: I get
your newsletter,
so I follow what you're doing.
A lot of it having to
do with Dakota pipeline.
We're going to get
into all of that.
But first, many people
don't know your culture.
I mean, they've seen movies,
maybe read a book or two.
But to really
understand your culture
and the modern
implications of what
happened, even starting
with your mother
when things started going awry.
So shall we begin talking
about your mother?
And you're from Standing Rock
Reservation, which many people
have heard of the Standing Rock
Reservation in North Dakota.
So--
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: I was born in the
Black Hills of South Dakota,
what is now called South Dakota.
And [SPEAKING LAKOTA] is what we
call the Black Hills, the heart
of everything that is.
And my mother, she
had a long story,
a long, controverted history.
She was taken to a boarding
school in South Dakota,
along with my uncle.
And it was-- since the inception
of the reservation era,
Native people have
been through a lot.
We're still navigating an
ongoing colonial experience.
For us, it's not post-colonial.
>> REGINA: No, not at all.
You're--
>> IRON EYES: Not at all.
>> REGINA: --living in it.
>> IRON EYES: And you saw
that at Standing Rock,
at the pipeline ordeal.
And so we lost a lot.
There's a lot of--
>> REGINA: Can you go back
a little bit and tell--
how was your mother living,
what was her life like, and then
the reservation
life, and then being
taken into this
boarding system where--
boarding school system where
tradition was encouraged
to be forgotten about.
>> IRON EYES: Yeah.
>> REGINA: [LAUGHS]
To say it politely.
>> IRON EYES: Before the United
States Army Corps of Engineers
flooded the Standing
Rock reservation,
they flooded seven different
reservations for hydropower
for its own reasons.
They did not get our consent.
And my mother was
living off and on
between her mother and
father's house, which
was a square house,
American style
house, and her grandmother,
who was a medicine woman, who
practiced her art
and her healing ways
on the riverbed,
which was a very--
the most fertile
ground that we had.
We could make an
economic life from there.
All of our foods, medicines,
all of the habitats,
the riparian
habitats, everything
that is good about heavily--
about the ecosystems.
They're heavily wooded.
We depended on that.
And my mom spent a lot of time
with her grandmother there.
And I never got a chance to
meet my mother's grandmother,
but I was pretty much raised
by four different grandmothers
in my lifetime.
And she had a very
good life there,
but she could never make
sense of the contrast of why
does my grandmother,
who I cherish very much
and who helps the
community, why is she living
in this one-room shack
with a dirt floor
in a wood stove in
relative discomforts
compared to what her dad, who
worked for the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, had a
nice house and was
upwardly mobile in the oncoming
new political economic reality.
My grandfather, who I'm talking
about, was born in 1900.
So when we think
of Native people,
sometimes we think
of ancient history.
But that's because of how we've
been typecast by Western media.
>> REGINA: This
is modern history.
>> IRON EYES: It's
modern history.
This is my grandfather
that we're talking about,
who's 10 years younger than
the state of South Dakota
or the state of North Dakota.
But think of those as the
spiritual buffalo economy days
that we had come from and
from the 1870s onward, say,
after the Battle of Little
Bighorn, Custer's Last Stand,
then we start learning
to speak English.
Not voluntarily at first,
but sometimes voluntarily.
But the United States, in
conjunction with the churches,
imposed this boarding
school or residential school
era, which that is a
euphemism for that era.
That is an era of
cultural genocide.
It's an era complete--
the erasure and the degradation
of our internal dignity
that we're born
with and that we can
avail ourselves with
in different aspects.
A lot of us learn the
English language first now.
But for my mom and
for my grandparents,
that wasn't the case.
And there's a lot of
people alive today--
and that number is
going down, but they
learn Lakota first,
Lakhótiya Wóglaka, which
is another software, another--
it's another software.
Think of it like a
technology through which
we can access different
elemental universal powers
and relationships.
And yes, you can also get there
through the English language,
but all of our rituals,
our ceremonies, our songs,
our knowledge systems, all of
those are also available to us
in our language, in
the Lakota language.
But she goes to boarding
school, and it's horror stories.
It's the stuff of
torture, humiliation.
You get caught speaking
your Native language,
you're going to
put-- you're going
to kneel in the
corner on a broomstick
until they determine that
you've suffered long enough.
We've gone through that.
That resulted in a loss of
identity, cultural identity,
pride, dignity, a working
metaphysics or a system
of knowing whatever
the self is, one self,
your personalized experience,
your personalized consciousness.
We were recreated through the
lens of the European imagination
in those places.
And I'm sitting here
>> REGINA: These
are not compatible.
>> IRON EYES: These are not--
we've had to make them
compatible, because most of us
don't speak our Lakota or
traditional Indigenous language.
There's more than
probably 300 languages
still in what is now
called the United States.
But the times have shifted.
It's no longer termination
of tribal nations
and a degradation of spiritual
and political degradation
of Indigenous peoples.
We're trying to turn that
around and say, hey, look at--
we've all been
through some trauma.
We've all been separated from
a natural, mystic, spiritual
relationship with the universe.
We've all suffered that,
no matter what color
our skin is or what our--
>> REGINA: No, that is true.
And in that sense, that
extends to everyone.
And we've made
choices that-- where
we've done it to
ourselves, and it's also
been perpetuated upon
humanity by others
as well, as we well know.
I want to go back to your
language, for a moment.
So if you set a simple
sentence like, I am a member--
would you say Sioux of
the Sioux tribe then?
I am a member--
>> IRON EYES: In the legal
documents, yes, Sioux Nation.
>> REGINA: So if you would
say, I am a member of the Sioux
Nation, what would that
sound like in your language?
I want to feel it.
>> IRON EYES: Yeah.
You would say,
[SPEAKING LAKOTA].
I belong to the
Lakota people or the--
Oceti Sakowin is--
we were called Sioux
because of a misinterpretation.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: So your
language itself--
thank you for that.
The language itself, I just
wanted to hear a little,
feel a little.
The language itself clearly
isn't Germanic or Latin-based.
So your language, doing
the historical study
of the roots of language--
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: --etymology
and some of the other.
I mean, I remember
reading some--
a couple of books I read had to
do with their Iroquois language
being at the root of
very, very ancient--
other places in the languages
in other parts of the world.
What is your language?
What do you know
about your language
and where it stemmed from?
Because it's a completely
different vibration.
And to have to cut that off
and go into a Germanic language
no less, thinking and
acting, just the language
itself would change everything.
>> IRON EYES:
Language, Lakolya--
the [LAKOTA], the [LAKOTA],
the teachings and the language
itself has otherworldly origins.
>> REGINA: That's
what I'm wondering.
Tell us about that.
>> IRON EYES: This is a long
story, and that's a long story.
But it involves the
creation of the universe
and the order of creation,
divine creation, sometimes
self-determined creation because
these gods or these spirits
have their own ambitions.
They have their own intentions.
And one particular-- he's not
a god or he's not really a he,
but it is not a god.
It is a servant, a role
player, this entity that
served the good spirits and even
the bad spirit, you might say.
They're all one.
And this particular entity
named Kssa served these gods.
And there was a time
when he would serve--
they would serve these
gods even white foods
underneath the earth.
And this particular person,
entity was ashamed of his form.
And so these negative
forces capitalized
on that, exploited that.
They like to cause mischief.
They like to embarrass
the good gods.
And they convinced
this particular entity
to go along with their
schemes, and this-- so he
participated in embarrassing
the gods, and he was punished,
or it was punished and
stripped of his title,
and he became the trickster.
And it is said that
this entity taught--
before he became the trickster,
he taught the language.
He taught Lakota.
This entity named
things in the universe.
And so that's where our
language comes from.
>> REGINA: So is it fair to say,
you know how the world is today
and all the subjects
we do here on Gaia,
that this trickster was an off--
from an off planet culture,
from another planetary system as
a physical being who came here
among other physical beings?
>> IRON EYES: Yeah.
I never thought of
it in that context,
but he's certainly otherworldly.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: And you
could even say that this--
and this trickster was
banished here, this--
>> REGINA: To Earth.
>> IRON EYES: --Gaia, mama
Gaia [SPEAKING LAKOTA].
>> REGINA: Oh, was
that a punishment?
>> IRON EYES: Yeah,
it was a punishment.
It wasn't just him.
It was those who convinced
him and those who helped him.
And they have names.
And they're real forces,
you know what I'm saying.
So--
>> REGINA: And are these real
forces still present today?
>> IRON EYES: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: Are they present
beyond just the influence
of your tribe, but
greater influence?
>> IRON EYES: The
two-legged being, that's us.
The [LAKOTA], the-- we used
to be the [LAKOTA] or the--
we were a different form,
maybe, under the earth.
I don't know if
we had this same--
we had the same bones.
The bones that are in US, the
organs, the flesh and blood,
the water that is in us,
those are ancient powers.
The water that is inside of us
and the divine composition that
generates consciousness
and allows us to navigate.
For the longest time,
maybe Western philosophy
thought that
consciousness might have
been generated from the brain.
But we're finding
out more and more--
the brain does have a
very important role.
>> REGINA: They're just now
getting around to understanding
that that's not where it lives.
We're a little behind you guys.
>> IRON EYES: For
some reason, we call--
and there's a lot.
When you mention
the word etymology,
we call eye of the heart.
Just like third eye,
but eye of the heart.
>> REGINA: Interesting
you should say that,
because what I'm understanding
now is that humanity is going
to-- consciousness rules.
Consciousness is
running the show.
Can look ugly.
It's still running the
show toward a higher end.
And that one of the big upgrades
in humanity is going to be that,
not just you, but
all of humanity
will start running their
mind and intelligence
through the intelligence of the
heart, through the heart's eye,
as you say.
>> IRON EYES: We've struggled
so hard, even today, even--
I was not-- I was born before--
I had a childhood
before the internet,
and my children don't
have that childhood.
They were born in the smart
generation with the artificial--
with the thing, with the
screen, the thing that
is connecting and
drawing your energy.
Because those are real--
those are elements.
Those are--
>> REGINA: Talk
about tricksters.
>> IRON EYES: Yes,
talk about tricksters.
And so we have to
live our-- what
might be called a mythology.
I don't have the Western
academic background
for talking about how
the West has studied--
>> REGINA: Consciousness.
>> IRON EYES: --consciousness,
mythology, all of that.
But that's my walk of life.
I live there.
That's where I love to be.
And so for instance, when I got
exposed to Joseph Campbell, just
as an example, then it
got me interested in,
how does this
English-speaking world now,
how are they viewing
Indigenous cultural mythology?
How is it creating this reality
that I'm having to navigate?
>> REGINA: That is
your lived experience.
>> IRON EYES: That's
my lived experience.
And now this is-- now you also
have the ceremonial elders, who
are very much still here, who I
would love to see them on Gaia
or-- you know what I mean?
Just coming out and
building bridges,
because that's what I've done.
I have a gift for that.
Throughout the course
of my life, I can see.
>> REGINA: Well, and
you're well-educated.
You're an attorney.
You understand how
this world works now.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: This world.
>> IRON EYES: Absolutely.
And there's still are people who
are keeping the ancient fires
burning and making
sure that our--
the substance and depth of what
we are is going to live on.
It won't be absorbed
and consumed
by this thing that has done it
to all of Europe's Indigenous
people.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: --over the years,
or the centuries, I should say.
So I've had that realization
that, look, we're
all our souls or our spirits.
We're grieving for ceremony.
We're grieving for ritual.
We're grieving for
a connection to be
received from divine powers.
And that's what our
ceremonies do for us.
And I come from a lineage of
people that want to share that.
>> REGINA: So what would
happen if you were to do
your ceremonies in English?
>> IRON EYES: Sometimes they do.
>> REGINA: But I mean, what--
I'm trying to get my mind around
going from such a completely
different, rich, possibly
even star-driven language,
and then having to convert that
into a Germanic language, which
is certainly one
thing about Germanic--
the Germanic languages, is
they're less emotionally
charged, generally
speaking, although we have
some good expletives available.
[LAUGHTER]
But where your language has a
more-- kind of a more round--
a very round, full,
ancient feeling to it.
And what we form in our
mouths has a huge impact
on our vibrations.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: So that's why I
said, what would it feel like
to suddenly switch and do your
same ceremony from the Native
tongue to English?
What would that feel
like inside even?
>> IRON EYES: We
don't know that yet.
And hopefully, we don't
ever have to know that.
But some of our scholars,
some of our people
don't believe that we would
receive the same power
exchange--
>> REGINA: Probably, yeah.
>> IRON EYES: --if
It wasn't in Lakolya.
And you're right on, the
[LAKOTA] and-- the tongue
and the voice, [LAKOTA].
The voice is sacred.
The voice is powerful.
The voice can create,
and it can destroy.
And that's it say-- that's what
[LAKOTA] means to us, sacred.
The drum.
When you're speaking of, we
have to do certain things,
we meaning human
beings, we have to sing.
We have to speak
in a certain way.
We have to hit the drum.
We have to do those things
because that is the thing--
the conduit.
I don't want to say technology,
but you know what I mean.
>> REGINA: Yeah,
vibrational, contact.
>> IRON EYES:
Vibrational frequency.
It brings it in.
And if you're right
about Lakolya,
because I watched these
videos of Pete Catches Sr.
And he is one of our
luminaries in the Lakota world.
He also went to boarding school.
And to hear him speak Lakota,
it almost sounds like a--
it sounds like it--
like a harmony.
>> REGINA: Like a song.
>> IRON EYES: It
sounds like a song.
And it's so beautiful.
And you're right about that.
It's important, and
more and more of us
are getting back to
speaking our language.
>> REGINA: I'm so glad to
hear that, because it's--
like I said, I can
feel the difference
in the quality of the vibration.
And this is kind of a similar
thing happening right now
in the schools in this
country where they stopped
teaching cursive writing.
Now, for all--
I'm sure your mother was not too
happy to learn cursive writing.
We get that.
But since there-- that was the
way I was taught as a child
and up until recently,
people were taught.
Something that
happens to the brain
when you're making circles and
loops, and it's more geometric,
and they're connected together.
That develops the young
brain very differently,
like the sound of your
language develops the brain
very differently.
Now that's gone.
And now almost the
printed word is gone.
Now it's down to
digital computer keys.
And a lot is lost
in our development
in the subtle coding,
I think, when anything
in language or writing is lost.
>> IRON EYES: The
language is powerful.
The language is the blueprint.
It's its own spirit
is what we believe.
>> REGINA: Oh, like in the
Bible, first there was the word.
>> IRON EYES: First
there was the word.
First there was God's word.
And I'll give you an example.
When my wife moved us to the
Standing Rock Reservation--
well, that's where I
grew up until I was 19,
I was raised on the
Standing Rock Nation.
And I had gone off to school.
I'd given my time and energy
to this Western academic
experience, and I learned
great things there.
I learned good things there.
I studied a bit of political
philosophy, and I loved it.
I liked it, and I loved
it, and it activated me.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
You had the intellectual
challenge of this whole--
>> IRON EYES: Yeah.
It was--
>> REGINA: --landscape.
Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: I appreciate it.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: And
then I ended up back--
we ended up back proximate
to the reservation,
and my wife took a job on the
Standing Rock Reservation.
So I moved back.
We all moved back.
And the gentleman who was
giving me a tour of the house,
he's a speaker.
He's Lakota.
His name is Councilman
Richard-- he's a Councilman now,
Richard Long Feather.
But he comes up to me and
he says, [SPEAKING LAKOTA].
I'm doing all right.
He's just asking
me how I'm doing.
He was raised by old people, so
he thinks that I'm a speaker.
And he just starts going off
in Lakota for the full tour.
And at some point, he looked
at me and he goes, [LAKOTA],
do you understand
what I'm saying?
And I--
>> REGINA: A little bit.
>> IRON EYES: [LAKOTA], a little
bit, you know what I mean?
I can-- But after he spoke
the language to me for about--
only about five minutes, I go
out to my car, and I'm in tears,
and I can feel--
>> REGINA: Yeah, activated.
>> IRON EYES: I can feel
something being secreted,
either on my skull or spine,
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> IRON EYES: --you might say.
And it's-- I don't
know what the word is.
It's subliming me.
It's just taking over me.
>> REGINA: So you're going
into almost a euphoric opening,
state.
>> IRON EYES:
There's a vibration.
I just feel one of the best
I've ever felt in my life.
Just from--
>> REGINA: Just
hearing that language.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: Beautiful.
Yeah, no, I just
had to ask you--
I hadn't planned on going
down that rabbit hole,
but it seems like it's
so important in terms
of the preservation of not
just your tradition, but higher
frequencies from here
or elsewhere that really
can't afford to be obliterated.
You need to keep
those frequencies.
OK.
So I'm going to go
back for a second.
You said the trickster
got the people who
were living inside the
earth, and many stories
are coming up now.
The Radu Cinamar
books are all about
the cultures living inside
the Earth, the tunneling down,
the stuff going on, the
holographic chambers
inside the earth, a
lot of stuff in those.
And another book by Sarah
Breskman, who I interviewed--
she does regressions.
I'll bring something up on
that later, a little later.
But people talking about
the Tuatha Dé Danann
and some of the other
realms of beings
living on the
inside of the earth
and then coming to the surface.
And you're saying that your
people were on the inside,
and they were tricked into
coming onto the surface.
And it was kind of, as I
recall, summertime conditions.
Like, this isn't so bad, until--
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: --winter came.
>> IRON EYES: That trickster
was living here with two other--
it's called
double-faced woman and--
>> REGINA: Well, that doesn't
sound good to begin with.
>> IRON EYES: [LAKOTA].
These are figures
in our worldview.
And so the trickster went in--
sent a wolf laden with a pack.
And in that pack are
all of the things that
are going to appeal to
the two-legged being,
or the beings that
are underneath there.
What became us, what was us.
And first opens up the most
beautiful song from one
of maybe a meadowlark or
a songbird from the earth.
And then shows them the most
beautiful blooming flower
and lets them smell it,
shows them a smoked hide,
smell this smoked hide,
hear these beautiful songs.
>> REGINA: Come hither.
>> IRON EYES: Everything
that appeals to the senses.
Touch these soft
furs and soft hides.
And then the final
thing was now,
taste this meat,
this Buffalo meat.
And when we tasted the--
see, we weren't supposed
to come to the surface.
But when we tasted the Buffalo
meat, then we're like, OK.
>> REGINA: I'm in.
>> IRON EYES: I'm
going to disobey God.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: I'm
going to disobey God,
and we're going to the
surface with this--
this entity here.
Every culture has a story
like that where they
emerge into this other world.
And it's also--
I know from some of the
Eastern traditions--
I don't know what--
I read some of the Bhagavad
Gita, maybe the song of god
and Krishna's counsel
in the time of war.
I'm interested in a lot of
other seekers and seekers
in different cultures.
But they talk about the nine
gates to the kingdom of heaven,
I think it is, or
the city of heaven
being the two eyes, the
nostrils, the mouth, the ears,
the--
>> REGINA: The senses?
>> IRON EYES: --sex organ, the
digestive organ, and the senses.
It's the same thing.
And--
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: --is we have
this high righteous knowledge,
this ancient knowledge, but it's
been completely downplayed--
they tell a story like
we're some primitive people.
We're Stone Age people.
I mean, yeah, we were
alive during the Stone Age,
but we just had-- we
had different goals.
And so we emerged
onto the earth.
We disobeyed God.
And the trickster looked
at us, summertime went by.
It began to get so cold
that we couldn't live.
And we went-- we ran back--
>> REGINA: No birds.
Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: We ran back to
the cave in the Black Hills.
It's still there.
It's the National Park,
Wind Cave National Park.
>> REGINA: Yes,
I've read about it.
>> IRON EYES: And we said,
God, we made a mistake.
>> REGINA: Too bad.
>> IRON EYES: Too bad.
You're there now, and
you have to endure.
>> REGINA: Kind of like
everybody else here.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: You guys
weren't exempt.
[LAUGHTER]
Here we all are.
But the good thing is,
with the Native Americans,
the people here,
there was-- there
continued to be
a connection with
and a reverence for Mother
Earth and nature itself,
which was certainly lost over
the last couple of centuries
of industrialization.
And this seems to me, it doesn't
even matter who I'm talking to,
who I'm interviewing,
what book I'm reading.
Our path to truth is to get
rid of the trickster, which
is everything we're being
led to believe right, back
to nature and our essential
selves and our hearts, right?
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: And so this is where
the Native Americans have a big
jump on the rest
of us around here.
>> IRON EYES: We all have
senses, and we have--
my reason, consciousness.
We have different words
for those concepts.
And sometimes I don't even know
if they translate directly,
but we are--
there's an order.
There's a divine
order of creation.
And the earth herself,
itself, is a god,
is a divine entity, a
powerful entity that is--
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: --very, very old.
>> IRON EYES: Maybe 5
to 8 billion years old.
I don't even know what--
>> REGINA: They say even
older, I think, in the Vedas.
Yeah.
>> IRON EYES: But we also--
we have earth origins of blood
clot, simple life or organism,
what do you call it?
Maybe cellular.
We just have-- we just
call that [LAKOTA],
like the infinitesimally
small things.
But we also have--
we come through the Big
Dipper, the spirit itself.
Before you arrived
here, according to us,
you determined-- you
chose to incarnate here
and to achieve consciousness
and to be born.
You chose that.
You chose your parents.
>> REGINA: I'm totally on
board with what you're saying.
>> IRON EYES: And then--
>> REGINA: I agree.
>> IRON EYES: --when our body
expires and the divine flesh
and blood and the bones, which
the creator, you might say,
took a bit of Íŋyaŋ, the first
God, which became the stone.
And that's where
our bones come from.
The flesh and blood came
from Mother Earth herself.
So everything that is
the flesh and blood--
and then the water
is also separate.
That is a separate
god-like entity.
>> REGINA: I mean,
these are facts.
>> IRON EYES: They're facts.
>> REGINA: We are born--
>> IRON EYES:
They're scientific--
>> REGINA: --out
of the elements--
>> IRON EYES: --facts too.
Yes.
>> REGINA: --of nature.
>> IRON EYES: We
are those elements.
And so--
>> REGINA: No arguing that.
>> IRON EYES: But
somewhere along the way,
we got separated from
that sacred walk of life,
that sacred way of knowing.
Whatever it was stole the
sacred, stole the magic of life,
and is trying to subdue that
potential, the potential
for that heightened awareness,
that heightened consciousness.
And I even believe that the
mythology of AI and let's
go to Mars and let's colonize
Mars, we should look within.
We should look within ourselves.
We should look within
the planet herself
and figure out how to
achieve some sort of respect
relationship.
Some sort of harmony
would be great.
But it's a different world now.
We're not anti-technology, but
we are certainly pro-sacred
mythology, sacred
metaphysics, and having
all human beings be able to
have that in their lives.
And that's available to us.
But I was going to
say that the start--
when you mentioned
star people, not only
do we come from
the stars, but we
return through the same
portal that we arrived here.
And--
>> REGINA: Big Dipper?
>> IRON EYES: Through
the Big Dipper, yes.
So maybe I don't know what our
state of knowledge is on that--
>> REGINA: No, that's--
>> IRON EYES:
--particular place.
>> REGINA: --interesting.
OK.
So now today then,
have your people
do you think-- now, we've
got to separate people
under 30 who've been
raised on devices.
It's a different world.
But generally speaking,
is there still
the sense of gratitude
toward Mother Earth?
>> IRON EYES: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: Because gratitude
is a very high frequency,
and I can't imagine a better
way to go into connection with
Mother Earth, which we
all have to do again.
>> IRON EYES: For us,
there's no separation.
The English language is a
tricky, little pirate commerce
slash other--
maybe other things language.
But the people who speak
Lakota, my elders--
I'm thinking of a man named Dave
Swallow who said to me, tȟókša,
it's good that you have
the-- you're a lawyer
and you got this
knowledge in that world.
But with the English
language comes doubt.
He said, with the English
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> IRON EYES: And--
>> REGINA: Is it inherent to the
English language or the mindset?
>> IRON EYES: Maybe.
>> REGINA: Enhances it.
>> IRON EYES: Yeah.
Maybe it's just
the software itself
that's running the consciousness
allows for different things
to happen.
I don't know for
sure, but-- or he
could have just been
encouraging me to learn Lakota.
>> REGINA: [LAUGHS]
That's what you do.
>> IRON EYES: But we
don't see a separation.
There's a phrase we
use, [SPEAKING LAKOTA].
Everything that is my relative.
And at some point in
somewhere-- and I can only
point to maybe the
Enlightenment, or Cartesian
philosophy where there
was a separation.
The mind is separate
from the body.
Even the spirit-- they might not
even have recognized the spirit,
but the spirit was
separate from the mind.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: The human--
>> REGINA: Everything
was parted out.
>> IRON EYES: Everything
got abstracted over time.
Human beings no longer
had a relationship
with their food source.
For us, it's the Buffalo.
For other cultures,
it's something else.
We no longer paid attention to
the earthly and heavenly cycles
like we once did, and
all of our ceremonies.
So we've suffered that as
well, this separation of--
this connection that we have
internally and outwardly
with the divine universe.
But our ceremonies bring
it all back into unity.
We create unitive,
transcendental experiences
through the sweat
lodge, for instance,
which combines all of
the sacred elements--
the earth, the air,
the fire, the water.
>> REGINA: Does
it, more or less,
then take you into an ecstatic
state of connection again with
everything?
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: --the ceremonies?
>> IRON EYES: It provides a--
it's a portal and a womb to us.
And it's our oldest ceremony.
And it's the one that
is most widespread.
The Lakota people are sharers.
I like to say we're small, but
we're global in our approach.
Some people are not.
Some people are like,
no, let's not do that.
Let's pull you
back a little bit.
And I respect that.
But I was just--
I have teachers like
chief Leonard Crow
Dog, who's no longer with us--
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: But
he was-- it was--
>> REGINA: Wounded Knee.
>> IRON EYES: --because
of people like him, yes,
that the sweat lodge ceremony,
the sundance ceremony has gained
at least a Western Hemispheric
presence and respect and created
allies of the Lakota people.
>> REGINA: That is true.
But I also wonder how you feel
about essentially the white man
also co-opting--
>> IRON EYES: Oh,
that's a problem.
That--
>> REGINA: It seems like
it would be a problem--
it seems like it
would be a problem.
>> IRON EYES: It's
definitely a problem--
>> REGINA: I can't tell you
how many white Native American
shamans want to be interviewed.
>> IRON EYES:
They're seeking too.
They're seeking a connection.
>> REGINA: I know that, and
there's nothing wrong with that.
But from your point of view,
it seems like co-opting to me.
>> IRON EYES: It's co-opting.
And they don't know a
whole lot, and there's
a concept called
[LAKOTA] in our language,
which means having a
humility about things,
like an innate experience
or innate respect.
There's just certain things
that we wouldn't do--
we wouldn't mess around
with certain things,
because we respect
them too much,
and they're going to have
real-life consequences.
Benefits, blessings,
consequences.
All of that comes from--
it's seeking out
that connection.
It takes a person to
take that step forward.
If you want to know
more, then, hey,
you're going to have to
go into a sweat lodge
and purify yourself.
>> REGINA: So
let's look at that.
So people listening
are thinking,
oh my god, my soul, I can
feel I need this purification.
I need this connection
with nature.
And what a beautiful language.
And getting some
kind of desire--
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: --worked up.
And how do they do that?
Because a lot of
your ceremonies are
closed and they're
for your people.
>> IRON EYES: Yeah.
There's a lot of-- a lot of
our people have already--
they've already done what
I'm doing right now with you,
which is exploring in a
very respectful, potent way
the depths and the
sources of what we are
and how we're connected.
I can-- John Fire Lame Deer.
Chief Leonard Crow Dog,
there's a less known--
he wouldn't write a book,
but he was my first teacher.
His name is Sunny
Richards, and I could not
get him to write a book.
But he said, if there's a
book that could be written,
it's about the dark arts
and how human beings
are susceptible to--
>> REGINA: Oh, boy, yes.
The manipulation of--
>> IRON EYES: That
negative source of it.
>> REGINA: Oh, we're
watching it all play out.
>> IRON EYES: And human beings--
we're only human beings.
So we try to be good, and
we try to redeem ourselves,
and we try to walk in that way.
But--
>> REGINA: But we're vulnerable.
We're credulous people.
We're human.
We're credulous.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: We tend to absorb
what we're exposed to, and a lot
of it is driven by
trauma and fear, sadly,
which once you're in trauma,
you'll believe anything pretty
much.
You're wide open.
So learning without
trauma and fear
more along the lines of
appreciation, gratitude.
Like you're talking about
being in unity or harmony.
>> IRON EYES: You may have
heard of like Black Elk.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: He became
Nicholas Black Elk.
He might become a Saint.
He's nominated for sainthood--
>> REGINA: Oh, lovely.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
But like, we know the
descendants of Mr.--
Black's Elk is a--
the fact that he hooked up with
a non-native guy, a white guy,
a European guy, John
G. Neihardt, and they
wrote Black Elk Speaks.
They wrote other things too,
but that was the first book
that I read that
sent me on a journey.
I was raised not in any way
as a-- in a Christian way,
but a lot of Native people are.
I'm not trying to say
anything about that.
I'm saying that my mom
took me to Native ceremony.
>> REGINA: Wonderful.
>> IRON EYES: [SPEAKING LAKOTA].
We would go-- she would
take me to the ceremonies.
And I remember the
ceremonies as a kid.
I didn't understand
what was going on,
but I remember
being there, and I
remember having divine
experiences, you might say,
things that challenge the
laws of physics or somebody's
understanding of
how reality works.
It's all fluid, and
it's all up for--
it's relative, you might say.
Yes, you can trust your
senses for a lot of things,
but you should also
be aware that there
are other potentialities
that are there.
That are there for us to
access, for us to heal.
And so from Black Elk's
time to, I would say--
even the gentleman, the Lakota
people who sat with a guy
named James Walker five years
after the Wounded Knee Massacre.
This doctor shows up on
the Pine Ridge Reservation,
and he begins to
interface-- he's
trying to treat tuberculosis,
an outbreak of that.
So he says, I can't handle
this in my own Western medical
training.
I need the help of these
shaman, of these [LAKOTA],
these intercessors.
And so he obtains the help of
people like American Horse, who
is the grandfather of
people like Rick Two Dogs,
who Rick doesn't do a lot of--
these are guys--
Rick Two Dogs and Dickey
Moves Camp are probably the--
those two plus Crow Dog were
like the most well respected
spiritual people of our nation.
And Dickey Moves Camp,
we've talked to him.
He has a book out there.
Things are out there that are
available to your audience
to study, to go further in.
Some of the books that
I'm referencing, they all
have names John Fire Lame Deer.
I never met John Fire, but
my first medicine man teacher
did, and also was a disciple
of Chief Frank Fools Crow.
>> REGINA: We have
a few minutes left,
and I want to get to what's
happening with the pipeline,
but also just bring
us up to date.
But also, from your
perspective, the way in which
we approach with and engage
this beautiful planet and all
of her plants and sentient
creatures, all of the animals,
how, from a Native
American point of view,
do we go into harmony
with all of that,
besides gratitude
and appreciation?
>> IRON EYES: The reason why
Native people are constantly
defending Mother Earth--
it may appear to mean to
mainstream-- that we're always
protesting
development, but that's
just how it's propagandized.
We have religions,
you might say,
we have cultural
knowledge that connects us
to Mother Earth, that tells
us that we are composed
of divine creation,
including Mother Earth,
and all the other gods in our
way of knowing that there's
16 gods, you might say.
And there's an order
for those 16 gods.
Our ceremonies, the way
that our mythology instills
in us this innate
relationship, but more--
beyond that, a covenant to
defend the rights of those
nonhuman entities that are here
that predated the two-legged
being here--
>> REGINA: Our teachers.
>> IRON EYES: --from
which we derive--
from which we derive
our spiritual authority
in our ability to heal,
to heal each other.
We're talking about the Buffalo,
the bear, the spider, the elk.
It goes on.
And then we're not even saying a
word about the plants, the plant
nation.
>> REGINA: That's a
whole other conversation.
>> IRON EYES: That's
a whole other thing.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> IRON EYES: So we,
according to our knowledge,
won a race against the
four-legged beings.
And when we won,
yes, we won the right
to eat and consume the
four-legged beings,
but we also assume
the obligation
so that the four-legged
beings and all of creation
could flourish.
So that's what we're
constantly trying to do.
And water is sacred to us.
So when Big Oil, or anybody,
any big extractive complex,
they thought that the divine,
conscious, two-legged Native
people were all gone.
But we're not all gone.
>> REGINA: Well, that
brings us to the pipeline.
OK.
So just in two minutes, because
we've had so much fun talking,
we've run out of time.
In a couple of minutes, bring
us up to speed on the pipeline.
What you're fighting
for, what's at stake,
and what they're trying to get.
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
We're fighting for the
right of human beings
to have livable, healthy
ecosystems and water.
If you notice, where I live
now in the northern plains,
March is-- the month
is [SPEAKING LAKOTA],
which means the moon--
when the human's eyes hurt
so much because they're
snowblind from all the snow.
There is no snow in the
northern plains right now.
So something is shifting,
something is changing,
and we need to be more conscious
about what we do with our water.
All of America-- every single
person that calls themselves
American or Canadian
or what have you, you--
we need your help
to recognize that we
need to defend our clean water
and the healthy ecosystems--
>> REGINA: And that's what's
at stake with the pipeline.
>> IRON EYES: That's what's
And it's not only that, but
it's territorial integrity
of the Sioux Nation.
The Sioux Nation signed
treaties with the United States
of America.
So there's a spiritual
impetus, and there's
a legal reasoning why we
do the things that we do.
Why scores of
thousands of people
showed up at Standing Rock.
Because that was a monumental--
a seismic event, a cosmic
event that shifted the world.
And we have to try
to get to that place
where we see ourselves
connected with Mother Earth,
connected with
the natural world,
and we're willing to
assert our natural rights
and defend our human rights,
our constitutional rights
from any force that seeks
to diminish those rights.
>> REGINA: And that
goes for all of us.
>> IRON EYES: That's
all of us, together.
>> REGINA: We are all people
living on this beautiful planet,
and that's our obligation,
for all of us--
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: --to take care
of our beautiful host.
So we're out of time.
Any final thoughts,
Chase, before we go?
There's so much--
>> IRON EYES: I cannot
believe we're out of time.
Well, you know what--
>> REGINA: Oh, I had
so many more questions,
but another conversation.
>> IRON EYES: Yeah, another
time, another conversation.
We all have to start somewhere.
I was raised in a way that
left me open, open minds.
But when I realized that there
was a path that I could pursue,
that I couldn't learn in any
English speaking school or I
couldn't learn really--
I couldn't peer into
reality as we know it
or as we've been
conditioned to know it.
And so I begin to
take those steps.
And for your listeners,
for your audience,
congratulations on what you do.
I have great respect for you.
>> REGINA: Thank you.
>> IRON EYES: And there is
a pathway for people to seek
spiritual liberation.
And that is attainable,
achievable by every single one
of us.
And we have to figure
out where to start.
So what that is going to
look different for everybody.
>> REGINA: It will.
But aligning with our host
rather than against her
is, I think, a good
start and place.
>> IRON EYES: That's a
great place to start.
>> REGINA: Chase,
thank you so much,
and I look forward to
another conversation--
>> IRON EYES: Yes.
>> REGINA: --with you.
This was fun and enlightening.
>> IRON EYES: Thank you.
>> REGINA: You can learn more
about Chase's work through his
website, sacreddefense.org.
You can also sign up for
his newsletter regarding
ongoing activist activity on
the pipeline and much more.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[AUDIO LOGO]